Async runtime migrator (#520)
balena-io/pinejs: docs/Migrations.md

You can execute SQL using `tx.executeSql(query)`, however note that the model for which the migration is running will *not* be available under `sbvrUtils.api`, as it has not executed yet.

You should return a promise so pinejs can wait for completion/errors.

## Async Migrations

> Migrations that may lock tables for a long time for example column renames on large tables can be run as async migrations.
> Async migrations are executed in small batches within single transactions on the data and will run in parallel to pine (server). Async migrations are multi-instance save. They are synchronized between instances via a database table `migration status` and the minimum interval between two migration executions is guaranteed across instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Migrations that may lock tables for a long time, eg. column renames on large tables, can be run as async migrations.

Async migrations are executed in small batches within individual transactions and run concurrently while Pine is serving requests. Async migrations are multi-instance safe. They are synchronized between instances via the `migration status` database table and the minimum interval between two migration executions is guaranteed across instances.
```

Author: Thx!

> When multiple async migrations are specified in one deployment they are all executed competitive but not in parallel: That means, that one migration query is executed at a time but different migration queries can run after each other. Hence, migrations that depend on the result of a previous migration should not be described 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

When Pine starts and determines there are multiple async migrations to be run, it starts all migrations concurrently. These migrations however do not run in parallel: only one migration batch is executed at any given time, then another, and so on. Thus, migrations should not depend on the result a previous one.
```

> Async migrations run forever until the next deployment to guarantee that future data matching the migration condition are also migrated. The status of running migrations can be checked in `migration status` table. The configured execution parameters and the execution metrics are stored and updated after each migration iteration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once an async migration starts, it keeps running forever until the server is shutdown. This is to guarantee that new data inserted or updated at runtime can also be migrated. The status of running migrations can be checked in `migration status` table. The configured execution parameters and the execution metrics are stored and updated after each migration batch completes.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Thx!

> Async migrations are stored in the migrations folder specified in the pine configuration / model (same as the synchron / init migrations). The file names
> need to have an infix of type .async. and can be pure SQL query files or .ts / .js files executing a database SQL query.
> The async migration query has to have a LIMIT statement to limit the maximum count of 'locked' rows per transaction and migration step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Async migrations are stored in the migrations folder, alongside synchronous migrations. Their file names are significant and must contain the string `.async.` so they are treated as async migrations. They can be pure SQL (with `.sql` extension) or Typescript (with `.ts`/`.js` extensions) files.

The async migration query must have a `LIMIT` statement to limit the maximum number of affected rows per batch.
```

### TS migration file format with SQL query string

``` javascript
export = {
	sql: `\
UPDATE "test"
SET "columnC" = "test"."columnA"
WHERE id IN (   SELECT id FROM (
                    SELECT id FROM "test"
                    WHERE  "test"."columnA" <> "test"."columnC" OR "test"."columnC" IS NULL
                    LIMIT 1

                    ) tmp
            );
`,
	delayMS: 100,
	backoffDelayMS: 4000,
	errorThreshold: 15,
};
```

### TS migration file format with migrator funtion definition

``` javascript
export = {
	fn: async (tx: any) => {
		const staticSql = `\
UPDATE "test"
SET "columnC" = "test"."columnA"
WHERE id IN (   SELECT id FROM (
                    SELECT id FROM "test"
                    WHERE  "test"."columnA" <> "test"."columnC" OR "test"."columnC" IS NULL
                    LIMIT 1

                    ) tmp
            );
        `;

		return await tx.executeSql(staticSql);
	},
	delayMS: 100,
	backoffDelayMS: 4000,
	errorThreshold: 15,
};
```
### SQL query file (plain text)

> When providing a SQL file only the default values for interval, backoff and error threshold are: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default values for interval, backoff and error threshold are: 
```

Author: Thx

You can execute SQL using `tx.executeSql(query)`, however note that the model for which the migration is running will *not* be available under `sbvrUtils.api`, as it has not executed yet.

You should return a promise so pinejs can wait for completion/errors.

## Async Migrations

> Migrations that may lock tables for a long time, eg. column renames on large tables, can be run as async migrations.

Reviewer 2: I think column renames only affect the catalog. Maybe we should say something like:
```suggestion
Migrations that may lock tables for a long time, eg. migrating data between columns on large tables, can be run as async migrations.
```

Once an async migration starts, it keeps running forever even after Pine instance restarts. The async migration will stop being executed when finalized with a dedicated flag in the async migration definition. This is to guarantee that new data inserted or updated at runtime can also be migrated. The status of running migrations can be checked in `migration status` table. The configured execution parameters and the execution metrics are stored and updated after each migration batch completes. 

Each async migration needs to specify a pair of an async and a sync migration part, so that the sync migration statement closes the async migration and guarantees database consistency.

Async migrations are stored in the migrations folder, alongside synchronous migrations. Their file names are significant and must contain the string `.async.` so they are treated as async migrations. They can only be Typescript / Javascript (with `.ts`/`.js` extensions) files.

The async migration query must have a `LIMIT` statement to limit the maximum number of affected rows per batch.

### Async migration procedure
An async migration procedure for adding / renaming a column may follow these steps:

> 1. Deployment
>     - Add new column (with independent sync migration) to contain new data and add code accessing the new column
> 	- Old code reads/writes data to/from old column and async migration migrates data from old column to new column
> 	- New code reads/writes to/from new column
> 	- Async migrator runs forever
> 2. Deployment
> 	- Finalize async migration => only sync migration part gets executed
> 	- Sync migration migrates all left over data from old column to new column
> 	- Sync migration deletes old column
> 	- Only new code with reads/writes to/from new column 
> 	- Disable all old code that reads/writes to old column

Reviewer 2: In a multi-instance zero-downtime scenario, I think we should do the following (following how we do it today):
```suggestion
* Deployment 1
	- Add new column (with independent sync migration) to contain new data and add code accessing the new column.
	- Update the service's implementation to set both the old & new column on each write.
	- The service's implementation should only read the old column since the async migration still migrates data from old column to new column.
	- Async migrator runs forever.
* Deployment 2
	- Finalize async migration => only sync migration part gets executed.
	- Sync migration migrates all left over data from old column to new column.
	- Update the service's implementation to only read the new column, but still write the old one as well.
* Deployment 3
	- Update the service's implementation to stop settings the old column and remove it from the sbvr.
	- Make the old field NULLable if it isn't.
* Deployment 4
	- Delete the old column with a sync migration.
```

Author: @thgreasi great thx!

### TS migration file format with SQL query string

The placeholder `%%ASYNC_BATCH_SIZE%%` will be replaced with the value specified by asyncBatchSize parameter

``` javascript
export = {

> 	asyncSql: `\
>         UPDATE "device"
>         SET "note" = "device"."name"
>         WHERE id IN (   SELECT id FROM (
>                                                 SELECT id FROM "device"
>                                                 WHERE  "device"."name" <> "device"."note" OR "device"."note" IS NULL
>                                                 LIMIT %%ASYNC_BATCH_SIZE%%
>                                                 ) tmp
>                                 );
>         `,
> 	syncSql: `\
>         UPDATE "device"
>         SET "note" = "device"."name"
>         WHERE id IN (   SELECT id FROM (
>                                                 SELECT id FROM "device"
>                                                 WHERE  "device"."name" <> "device"."note" OR "device"."note" IS NULL
>                                                 ) tmp
>                                 );
>         `,

Reviewer 2: Do we really need the `tmp` subselect?
```suggestion
	asyncSql: `\
	UPDATE "device"
	SET "note" = "device"."name"
	WHERE id IN (
		SELECT id FROM "device"
		WHERE  "device"."name" <> "device"."note" OR "device"."note" IS NULL
		LIMIT %%ASYNC_BATCH_SIZE%%
	);
	`,
	syncSql: `\
	UPDATE "device"
	SET "note" = "device"."name"
	WHERE  "device"."name" <> "device"."note" OR "device"."note" IS NULL;
	`,
```
I think the indentation was weird as well. Mind the mixed spaced & tabs.

	delayMS: 100,
	backoffDelayMS: 4000,
	errorThreshold: 15,
	asyncBatchSize: 1,
	finalize: true,
};
```

### TS migration file format with migrator function definition

`${options.batchSize}` will be the value specified by asyncBatchSize parameter.

``` javascript
export = {
	asyncFn: async (tx: any, options) => {

> 		const staticSql = `\
> 		UPDATE "device"
> 		SET "note" = "device"."name"
> 		WHERE id IN (   SELECT id FROM (
> 							SELECT id FROM "device"
> 							WHERE  "device"."name" <> "device"."note" OR "device"."note" IS NULL
> 							LIMIT ${options.batchSize}
> 							) tmp
> 					);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		const staticSql = `\
		UPDATE "device"
		SET "note" = "device"."name"
		WHERE id IN (
			SELECT id FROM "device"
			WHERE  "device"."name" <> "device"."note" OR "device"."note" IS NULL
			LIMIT ${options.batchSize}
		);
```

        `;

		return await tx.executeSql(staticSql);
	},
	syncFn: async (tx: any) => {

> 		const staticSql = `\
> 		UPDATE "device"
> 		SET "note" = "device"."name"
> 		WHERE id IN (   SELECT id FROM (
> 							SELECT id FROM "device"
> 							WHERE  "device"."name" <> "device"."note" OR "device"."note" IS NULL
> 							) tmp
> 					);
>         `;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		const staticSql = `\
		UPDATE "device"
		SET "note" = "device"."name"
		WHERE  "device"."name" <> "device"."note" OR "device"."note" IS NULL;
        `;
```
